Translated missing descriptions (#12197)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/reference/observability/metrics/index.md

| `api.grpc.response.dropped_count`<br/>`RATE`, pieces | The number of responses dropped at the transport (gRPC) layer due to an error.<br/>Labels:<br/>- _api_service_: The name of the gRPC API service, such as `table`.<br/>- _method_: The name of a gRPC API service method, such as `ExecuteDataQuery`. |
| `api.grpc.response.issues`<br/>`RATE`, pieces | The number of errors of a certain type arising in the execution of a request over a certain period of time.<br/>Tags:<br/>- _issue_type_ is the error type wth the only value being `optimistic_locks_invalidation`. For more on lock invalidation, review [Transactions and requests to {{ ydb-short-name }}](../../../concepts/transactions.md). |

## GRPC API metrics for topics {#grpc_api_topics}

#|
||
Metric name
Type, units of measurement
|
Description
Labels
||

||

`grpc.topic.stream_read.commits`
`RATE`, pieces
|

> The number of the `Ydb::TopicService::StreamRead` method commits.

Reviewer: Это точно по-английски? Я, конечно, не настоящий сварщик, но читается как будто commits относится к методу (количество коммитов метода StreamRead). Сенсор показывает количество выполенных коммитов по результатам обратоботки сообщений, вычитанных с помощью StreamRead. Возможно, стоит чуть перефразировать (но я не уверен)

|
The number of errors occurred when working with the partition.

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.
- _consumer_ – the name of the consumer.

||

||

`grpc.topic.stream_read.partition_session.started`
`RATE`, pieces
|
The number of sessions opened within the given unit of time.

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.
- _consumer_ – the name of the consumer.

||

||

`grpc.topic.stream_read.partition_session.stopped`
`RATE`, pieces
|
The number of sessions closed within the given unit of time.

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.
- _consumer_ – the name of the consumer.

||

||

`grpc.topic.stream_read.partition_session.starting_count`
`RATE`, pieces
|
The number of sessions in the process of opening (the client received the command to open a session, but did not open the session yet).

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.
- _consumer_ – the name of the consumer.

||

||

`grpc.topic.stream_read.partition_session.stopping_count`
`RATE`, pieces
|
The number of sessions in the process of closing.

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.
- _consumer_ – the name of the consumer.

||

||

`grpc.topic.stream_read.partition_session.count`
`RATE`, pieces
|

> The number of partition sessions.

Reviewer: Maybe, "the number of active/alive partition sessions"?

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.
- _consumer_ – the name of the consumer.

||

||

`topic.partition.read.idle_milliseconds_max`
`GAUGE`, milliseconds
|
The maximum idle time (the time since the last read operation from a partition) in all partitions.

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.
- _consumer_ – the name of the consumer.

||

||

`topic.partition.read.lag_milliseconds_max`
`GAUGE`, milliseconds
|
The maximum difference between the write time and the creation time among all of the messages that were read for the last minute.

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.
- _consumer_ – the name of the consumer.

||

||

`topic.partition.write.lag_milliseconds_max`
`GAUGE`, milliseconds
|
The maximum difference between the write time and the creation time among all of the messages that were written for the last minute.

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.

||

||
`topic.partition.write.speed_limit_bytes_per_second`
`GAUGE`, bytes per second
|
The limit for the writing speed to a single partition.

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.

||

||

`topic.partition.write.throttled_nanoseconds_max`
`GAUGE`, nanoseconds
|

> The maximum throttled time for writing operations by all partitions. The worst case scenario, `topic.partition.write.throttled_nanoseconds_maх` = 10^9, means that writing was throttled for the whole second.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The maximum throttled time for write operations across all partitions. In the worst-case scenario, $topic.partition.write.throttled_nanoseconds_max = 10^9$, which means that writing was throttled for an entire second.
```

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.

||

||

`topic.partition.write.bytes_per_day_max`
`GAUGE`, bytes
|

> The maximum number of bytes written for the last day in all topic partitions.

Reviewer 2: It's unclear what "last day" means. A rolling 24 hours? A calendar day (then in which timezone)?

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.

||

||

`topic.partition.write.bytes_per_hour_max`
`GAUGE`, bytes
|

> The maximum number of bytes written for the last hour in all topic partitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The maximum number of bytes written in the last hour across all topic partitions.
```

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.

||

||

`topic.partition.write.bytes_per_minute_max`
`GAUGE`, bytes
|
The maximum number of bytes written for the last minute in all topic partitions.

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.

||

||

`topic.partition.write.idle_milliseconds_max`
`GAUGE`, milliseconds
|

> The maximum idle time of a partition for writing.

Reviewer 2: repeat the definition of idle time

Labels:

- _topic_ – the name of the topic.

||

|#

## Resource pool metrics {#resource_pools}

#|
||
Metric name
Type, units of measurement
|
Description
||

||
`kqp.workload_manager.CpuQuotaManager.AverageLoadPercentage`

> `RATE`, pieces

Reviewer 2: the name suggests it's in percents

|

> Average database load. `DATABASE_LOAD_CPU_THRESHOLD` uses this metric.

Reviewer 2: DATABASE_LOAD_CPU_THRESHOLD would better be a link to an explanation of what it is.

||

||
`kqp.workload_manager.InFlightLimit`
`GAUGE`, pieces
|

> The limit on the number of simultaneous (in flight) requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The limit on the number of concurrent in-flight requests.
```

||

||
`kqp.workload_manager.GlobalInFly`
`GAUGE`, pieces
|

> The number of requests that a database is handling at the moment. This metric works only for the pools with the enabled `CONCURRENT_QUERY_LIMIT` or `DATABASE_LOAD_CPU_THRESHOLD` option.

Reviewer 2: "at the moment" is usually referring to the current moment, while the metrics are for the past moments.

Author: concurrently

||

||
`kqp.workload_manager.QueueSizeLimit`
`GAUGE`, pieces
|

> The size of the execution queue for the requests that await processing.

Reviewer 2: The description doesn't match the name. Is it the current size or the limit?

||

||
`kqp.workload_manager.GlobalDelayedRequests`
`GAUGE`, pieces
|

> The number of requests in the execution queue. This metric works only for the pools with the enabled `CONCURRENT_QUERY_LIMIT` or `DATABASE_LOAD_CPU_THRESHOLD` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The number of requests in the execution queue. This metric is available only for pools with the `CONCURRENT_QUERY_LIMIT` or `DATABASE_LOAD_CPU_THRESHOLD` option enabled.
```
